DDL-for-Oracle-with-Orbeon-Forms-4.3-and-earlier.md, before:

```sql
create table orbeon_form_definition (
    created        timestamp,
    last_modified  timestamp,
    username       varchar2(255),
    app            varchar2(255),
    form           varchar2(255),
    deleted        char(1),
    xml            xmltype
) xmltype column xml store as basicfile clob;

create table orbeon_form_definition_attach (
    created        timestamp,
    last_modified  timestamp,
    username       varchar2(255),
    app            varchar2(255),
    form           varchar2(255),
    deleted        char(1),
    file_name      varchar2(255),
    file_content   blob
);

create table orbeon_form_data (
    created        timestamp not null,
    last_modified  timestamp not null,
    username       varchar2(255),
    app            varchar2(255) not null,
    form           varchar2(255) not null,
    document_id    varchar2(255) not null,
    deleted        char(1) not null,
    xml            xmltype not null,
    constraint orbeon_form_data_pk primary key (document_id, last_modified)
) xmltype column xml store as basicfile clob;


create table orbeon_form_data_attach (
    created        timestamp,
    last_modified  timestamp,
    username       varchar2(255),
    app            varchar2(255),
    form           varchar2(255),
    document_id    varchar(255),
    deleted        char(1),
    file_name      varchar2(255),
    file_content   blob
);

create index orbeon_form_definition_x      on orbeon_form_definition        (xml) indextype is ctxsys.context parameters ('sync (on commit)');
create index orbeon_form_data_x            on orbeon_form_data              (xml) indextype is ctxsys.context parameters ('sync (on commit)');

create index orbeon_form_definition_i1     on orbeon_form_definition        (app, form);
create index orbeon_form_definition_att_i1 on orbeon_form_definition_attach (app, form, file_name);
create index orbeon_from_data_i1           on orbeon_form_data              (app, form, document_id);
create index orbeon_from_data_attach_i1    on orbeon_form_data_attach       (app, form, document_id, file_name);
```

Commit message:

Add "not null" on all char(1), for consistency

DDL-for-Oracle-with-Orbeon-Forms-4.3-and-earlier.md, after:

```sql
create table orbeon_form_definition (
    created        timestamp,
    last_modified  timestamp,
    username       varchar2(255),
    app            varchar2(255),
    form           varchar2(255),
    deleted        char(1) not null,
    xml            xmltype
) xmltype column xml store as basicfile clob;

create table orbeon_form_definition_attach (
    created        timestamp,
    last_modified  timestamp,
    username       varchar2(255),
    app            varchar2(255),
    form           varchar2(255),
    deleted        char(1) not null,
    file_name      varchar2(255),
    file_content   blob
);

create table orbeon_form_data (
    created        timestamp not null,
    last_modified  timestamp not null,
    username       varchar2(255),
    app            varchar2(255) not null,
    form           varchar2(255) not null,
    document_id    varchar2(255) not null,
    deleted        char(1) not null,
    xml            xmltype not null,
    constraint orbeon_form_data_pk primary key (document_id, last_modified)
) xmltype column xml store as basicfile clob;


create table orbeon_form_data_attach (
    created        timestamp,
    last_modified  timestamp,
    username       varchar2(255),
    app            varchar2(255),
    form           varchar2(255),
    document_id    varchar(255),
    deleted        char(1) not null,
    file_name      varchar2(255),
    file_content   blob
);

create index orbeon_form_definition_x      on orbeon_form_definition        (xml) indextype is ctxsys.context parameters ('sync (on commit)');
create index orbeon_form_data_x            on orbeon_form_data              (xml) indextype is ctxsys.context parameters ('sync (on commit)');

create index orbeon_form_definition_i1     on orbeon_form_definition        (app, form);
create index orbeon_form_definition_att_i1 on orbeon_form_definition_attach (app, form, file_name);
create index orbeon_from_data_i1           on orbeon_form_data              (app, form, document_id);
create index orbeon_from_data_attach_i1    on orbeon_form_data_attach       (app, form, document_id, file_name);
```
