Form-Runner-~-Portal-~-Liferay-Proxy-Portlet-Guide.md, before:

## See also

- [[Form Runner Embedding|Form-Runner-~-Embedding]]
- [[Server-side Embedding API|Form Runner ~ APIs ~ Server side Embedding]]

## Status

This feature is available since Orbeon Forms 4.0.

_NOTE: An earlier version of the feature is reported to have had issues with Orbeon Forms 3.9 and 3.9.1. These issues have been fixed with Orbeon Forms 4.0 and newer._

## Introduction

Form Runner can be deployed directly into Liferay. However in some cases, it is desirable to deploy Form Runner separately. The Form Runner proxy portlet provides allows this type of deployment, with the following benefits:

- You configure a specific form to show in the portlet via portlet preferences.
- Form Runner can be maintained and upgraded separately from the portal.
- The Form Runner application itself does not have to be exposed to the outside world.

If you only need Form Runner and are happy with deploying only one form per portlet, and if you want a simple configuration UI to set this up, then the proxy portlet is for you. Otherwise, you will have to look into the [full portlet][1].

This guide describes how to install, administer and use the Form Runner proxy portlet.

_NOTE: As of Orbeon Forms 4.0, this feature has been tested with Liferay 6.0 and 6.1._

## Architecture

The solution is comprised of:

- __The proxy portlet:__ a Liferay portlet (JSR-286 portlet) available as a portlet application to deploy into Liferay
- __The Form Runner server:__ an Orbeon Forms instance deployed as a web application into a servlet container

The proxy portlet communicates with the Form Runner server using HTTP.

The Form Runner server can be entirely hidden behind a firewall as it doesn't need direct access from the user's web browser.

## Installation

Install and deploy Orbeon Forms [as usual][2]. You can deploy it:

- within the same container as Liferay
- in a separate servlet container

Note the URL at which Form runner is deployed. The default is assumed to be:

    http://localhost:8080/orbeon/

_NOTE: An instance of Form Runner configured as server for the proxy portlet cannot, as of 2011-01-07, be used as a regular instance of Form Runner due to the URL rewriting configuration. See the Limitations section below for more details._

### Configure Form Runner

For Orbeon Forms 4.0 and newer, no particular configuration is needed.

_NOTE: For builds prior to 2012-05-14, you need the following configuration in your [properties-local.xml][3]:_

```xml
<property
    as="xs:boolean"
    name="oxf.url-rewriting.wsrp.encode-resources"
    value="true"/>
```

_NOTE: Prior to 2011-10-18 builds, the following property is also needed:_

```xml
<property
    as="xs:string"
    name="oxf.url-rewriting.strategy.servlet"
    value="wsrp"/>
```

### Deploy the proxy portlet

1. Deploy `proxy-portlet.war` (formerly `orbeon-PE-proxy-portlet.war`) into Liferay
2. Add an instance of The Orbeon Forms → Form Runner portlet to a page:

![][4]

3\. The portlet will load with its default configuration. If Orbeon Forms is deployed at the default address, a form shows:

![][5]

If Orbeon Forms is _not_ deployed at the default address, the proxy portlet will initially show an error. You can ignore this error and proceed to the proxy portlet configuration below.

### Configure the proxy portlet

1. Open the portlet preferences page:

![][6]

2. Configure the preferences

![][7]

The preferences are as follows:

- __Form Runner Page__
    - Initial Form Runner action (page) to show
    - Possible values
        - _New Page_: show the "new" page for the given app/form
        - _Summary Page_: show the "summary" page for the given app/form
        - _Home Page_: Form Runner Home page showing the form list [SINCE Orbeon Forms 4.4]
- __Form Runner URL__
    - URL, including servlet context, where the Form Runner instance is deployed
    - Example: `http://localhost:8080/orbeon/`
- __Form Runner app name__
    - Initial Form Runner application name to show
    - Example: `orbeon`
- __Form Runner form name__
    - Initial Form Runner form name to show
    - Example: `controls`
- __Readonly access__
    - Whether the user is able to edit forms
    - _NOTE: To ensure read-only access, it is also important to configure a `oxf.fr.detail.buttons.view.*.*` property without the `workflow-edit` button._
- __Send Liferay language__ [SINCE Orbeon Forms 4.4]
    - Whether Form Runner should use the Liferay user's language
    - This also hides the Form Runner language selector
- __Send Liferay user__ [SINCE Orbeon Forms 4.4]
    - Whether the Liferay user information is sent to Form Runner
    - This sends the following headers to Form Runner
        - `Orbeon-Liferay-User-Id`
        - `Orbeon-Liferay-User-Screen-Name`
        - `Orbeon-Liferay-User-Full-Name`
        - `Orbeon-Liferay-User-Email`
        - `Orbeon-Liferay-User-Group-Id`
        - `Orbeon-Liferay-User-Group-Name`
        - `Orbeon-Liferay-User-Roles`

When read-only access is enabled, if the Form Runner summary page is enabled and accessed, selecting a form takes the user to the Review page instead of the Edit page for a given form.

Press the "Save" or "Cancel" button to save/cancel and return to the portlet.

The default values of the preferences are provided via initialization parameters in the `portlet.xml` file. The latest version of this file is [available here][8].

### Configuring header and URL parameter forwarding

[SINCE Orbeon Forms 4.1]

Specific client URL parameters and client request headers can be forwarded to Form Runner with the following portlet init parameters:

```xml
<init-param>
    <name>forward-parameters</name>
    <value>param1 param2</value>
</init-param>
<init-param>
    <name>forward-headers</name>
    <value>My-Header-1 My-Header-2</value>
</init-param>
```

The value of the parameters is  a space-separated list of parameter names or header names.

This makes these headers and URL parameters available to Form Runner, for example with the `xxf:get-request-header()` and `xxf:get-request-parameter()` functions.

[SINCE Orbeon Forms 4.2]

Headers forwarded now follow the capitalization specified in the `forward-headers` property. For example, if the incoming header has name `mY-hEaDeR-1,` and the property specifies `My-Header-1`, the header will be forwarded under the name `My-Header-1`.

### Configuring Form Runner to use Liferay user information

[SINCE Orbeon Forms 4.4]

When "Send Liferay user" is enabled, you can configure Form Runner to use the HTTP headers sent by the proxy portlet to handle forms access control. For this, you must use the "Header-driven method". Set the following properties:

```xml
<property
    as="xs:string"
    name="oxf.fr.authentication.method"
    value="header"/>
<property
    as="xs:string"
    name="oxf.fr.authentication.header.username"
    value="Orbeon-Liferay-User-Screen-Name"/>
<property
    as="xs:string"
    name="oxf.fr.authentication.header.group"
    value="Orbeon-Liferay-User-Group-Name"/>
<property
    as="xs:string"
    name="oxf.fr.authentication.header.roles"
    value="Orbeon-Liferay-User-Roles"/>

<property
    as="xs:string"
    name="oxf.http.forward-headers"
    value="Orbeon-Liferay-User-Screen-Name Orbeon-Liferay-User-Group-Name Orbeon-Liferay-User-Roles"/>
<property
    as="xs:string"
    name="oxf.xforms.forward-submission-headers"
    value="Orbeon-Liferay-User-Screen-Name Orbeon-Liferay-User-Group-Name Orbeon-Liferay-User-Roles"/>
```

For the `oxf.fr.authentication.header.username` header, you can choose any of the Liferay headers associated with the user, but typically this will be:

- `Orbeon-Liferay-User-Id`
- `Orbeon-Liferay-User-Screen-Name`
- or possibly `Orbeon-Liferay-User-Email`

### Enabling form selection via URL parameters

[SINCE Orbeon Forms 4.7]

You can enable form selection via URL parameters by setting the `enable-url-parameters` portlet parameter in `portlet.xml` to `true`:

```xml
<init-param>
    <name>enable-url-parameters</name>
    <value>true</value>
</init-param>
````

When this is enabled, the following portal URL parameters are propagated to Orbeon Forms to allow form selection:

- `orbeon-app`: the Form Runner app name
- `orbeon-form`: the Form Runner form name
- `orbeon-document`: the Form Runner document (for `edit` and `view` pages)
- `orbeon-page`: the Form Runner page (`new`, `edit`, or `view`)

### HTTP client configuration

[SINCE Orbeon Forms 4.7]

This is the same as the [[server-side embedding configuration|Form-Runner-~-APIs-~-Server-side-Embedding]].

## Performance tuning

See the Performance tuning section in [Deploying Orbeon Forms as a Portlet into Liferay](http://wiki.orbeon.com/forms/doc/developer-guide/admin/deployment-portlet).

## Securing Form Runner with an IP filter

### Rationale

The proxy portlet can be secured with Liferay. On the other hand, the Form Runner server runs as a servlet and whether it runs within the same container as Liferay or on a different machine, direct accesses from end clients must be prevented.

One first step to achieve this is to place the Form Runner server behind a firewall, where it can be accessed from the portal but not from end clients.

Additional security steps can be desirable depending on your environment. One such step is to use an IP filter in order to:

- Allow accesses from the proxy portlet and from Form Runner itself.
- Disallow accesses from any other sources.

The following describes such a configuration.

### Example configuration

There are many IP filter options out there. One option is to use the very flexible [UrlRewriteFilter][9]. You can configure it this way:

#### Put urlrewrite-3.2.0.jar in the Orbeon Forms WEB-INF/lib folder

#### Configure the filter in Orbeon Forms WEB-INF/web.xml

```xml
<filter>
    <filter-name>UrlRewriteFilter</filter-name>
    <filter-class>org.tuckey.web.filters.urlrewrite.UrlRewriteFilter</filter-class>
</filter>
<filter-mapping>
    <filter-name>UrlRewriteFilter</filter-name>
    <url-pattern>/*</url-pattern>
    <dispatcher>REQUEST</dispatcher>
    <dispatcher>FORWARD</dispatcher>
</filter-mapping>
```

This is a generic configuration which enables the filter for any incoming path.

#### Put the `urlrewrite.xml` configuration in the Orbeon WEB-INF folder

Here is an example configuration:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<urlrewrite>
    <rule>
        <condition type="remote-addr" operator="notequal">0:0:0:0:0:0:0:1%0</condition>
        <condition type="remote-addr" operator="notequal">127.0.0.1</condition>
        <set type="status">403</set>
        <to type="temporary-redirect" last="true">/unauthorized</to>
    </rule>
</urlrewrite>
```

This configuration encodes the following rule: "for any incoming path, if the remote IP is different from `0:0:0:0:0:0:0:1%0` (IPv6) and different from `127.0.0.1` (IPv4), then set the status to 403 and redirect to the path /unauthorized".

You should modify the IP address(es) to fit your network configuration, as the originating address might not be `127.0.0.1`, as well as modify the redirection path.

Enabling UrlRewriteFilter's logging is helpful to see what's happening during development. To do this, modify the `` config to:

```xml
<filter>
    <filter-name>UrlRewriteFilter</filter-name>
    <filter-class>org.tuckey.web.filters.urlrewrite.UrlRewriteFilter</filter-class>
    <init-param>
        <param-name>confReloadCheckInterval</param-name>
        <param-value>0</param-value>
    </init-param>
    <init-param>
        <param-name>logLevel</param-name>
        <param-value>DEBUG</param-value>
    </init-param>
</filter>
```

_NOTE: You could also setup filtering on the type "remote-host" and check on the value "localhost" instead of filtering on IP addresses, however often reverse DNS lookups are not enabled in servlet containers for performance reasons, which means you need to filter by IP address instead._

#### Test the setup

Make sure accesses from the proxy portlet work as before, and test that accesses from machines other than the portal and/or directly from the client browser get rejected.

## Scenarios

### Scenario: create and save form data

In this scenario, the user of the portlet is only allowed to capture and save form data.

Portlet preferences:

- __Form Runner action:__ new
- __Read-Only access:__ false

Configuration properties in `properties-local.xml` (here for the orbeon/contact form):

```xml
<property
    as="xs:string"
    name="oxf.fr.detail.buttons.orbeon.contact"
    value="clear submit"/>
<property
    as="xs:string"
    name="oxf.fr.detail.submit.buttons.orbeon.contact"
    value="clear"/>
```

### Scenario: list, edit, create and save form data

In this scenario, the user of the portlet can, in addition to capture and save, also list and edit submitted form data.

Portlet preferences:

- __Form Runner action:__ summary
- __Read-Only access:__ false

Configuration properties in `properties-local.xml` (here for the orbeon/contact form):

```xml
<property
    as="xs:string"
    name="oxf.fr.summary.buttons.orbeon.contact"
    value="new edit delete"/>
<property
    as="xs:string"
    name="oxf.fr.detail.buttons.orbeon.contact"
    value="close clear submit"/>
<property
    as="xs:string"
    name="oxf.fr.detail.submit.buttons.orbeon.contact"
    value="clear"/>
```

_NOTE: Remove the `delete` token if the Delete button is not needed._

### Scenario: list and review form data

In this scenario, the user of the portlet is only allowed to capture and save form data.

Portlet preferences:

- __Form Runner action:__ summary
- __Read-Only access:__ true

Configuration properties in `properties-local.xml` (here for the orbeon/contact form):

```xml
<property
    as="xs:string"
    name="oxf.fr.summary.buttons.orbeon.contact"
    value="print pdf"/>
<property
    as="xs:string"
    name="oxf.fr.detail.buttons.view.orbeon.contact"
    value="close"/>
```

## Limitations

### Form Runner configuration properties are global

The Form Runner configuration properties are global, i.e. a given Form Runner server cannot have configuration properties per portlet (although it can have them per app/form name). This means for example that for a given app/form/action, it is not possible to have a different set of buttons.

Concretely, this means that you cannot have the  following portlet instances at the same time:

- `orbeon/contact` form in "list, edit, create and save form data" scenario
- `orbeon/contact` form in "list and review form data" scenario

This is because both scenarios need a different configuration for the summary page buttons.

### Orbeon Forms URL rewriting configuration is global

_NOTE: This is no longer a limitation with Orbeon Forms 4.0 and nightly builds since 2011-10-18._

~~The Form Runner server's URL rewriting configuration is global. This configuration makes Orbeon Forms in effect inaccessible directly from a web browser.~~

~~This means that:~~

- ~~Form Builder must be deployed as its own WAR. So you deploy:~~
    - ~~one Orbeon Forms instance specifically as Form Runner server~~
    - ~~one Orbeon Forms instance as Form Builder server (or as a general-purpose Orbeon Forms installation)~~
- ~~Your Form Runner database (eXist, Oracle, etc., or your own persistence layer implementation) must be shared between the two installations.~~


[1]: http://wiki.orbeon.com/forms/doc/developer-guide/admin/deployment-portlet
[2]: http://wiki.orbeon.com/forms/doc/developer-guide/admin/installing
[3]: http://wiki.orbeon.com/forms/doc/developer-guide/configuration-properties
[4]: ./images/fr-liferay-add-form-runner.png
[5]: ./images/fr-liferay-proxy-portlet.png
[6]: ./images/fr-liferay-portlet-preferences.png
[7]: ./images/fr-liferay-portlet-config.png
[8]: https://github.com/orbeon/orbeon-forms/blob/master/descriptors/proxy-portlet/WEB-INF/portlet.xml
[9]: http://urlrewritefilter.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/src/doc/manual/3.2/index.html

Commit message:

Note that the forward-headers and forward-submission-headers properties are no longer required since 4.9.

Form-Runner-~-Portal-~-Liferay-Proxy-Portlet-Guide.md, after:

## See also

- [[Form Runner Embedding|Form-Runner-~-Embedding]]
- [[Server-side Embedding API|Form Runner ~ APIs ~ Server side Embedding]]

## Status

This feature is available since Orbeon Forms 4.0.

_NOTE: An earlier version of the feature is reported to have had issues with Orbeon Forms 3.9 and 3.9.1. These issues have been fixed with Orbeon Forms 4.0 and newer._

## Introduction

Form Runner can be deployed directly into Liferay. However in some cases, it is desirable to deploy Form Runner separately. The Form Runner proxy portlet provides allows this type of deployment, with the following benefits:

- You configure a specific form to show in the portlet via portlet preferences.
- Form Runner can be maintained and upgraded separately from the portal.
- The Form Runner application itself does not have to be exposed to the outside world.

If you only need Form Runner and are happy with deploying only one form per portlet, and if you want a simple configuration UI to set this up, then the proxy portlet is for you. Otherwise, you will have to look into the [full portlet][1].

This guide describes how to install, administer and use the Form Runner proxy portlet.

_NOTE: As of Orbeon Forms 4.0, this feature has been tested with Liferay 6.0 and 6.1._

## Architecture

The solution is comprised of:

- __The proxy portlet:__ a Liferay portlet (JSR-286 portlet) available as a portlet application to deploy into Liferay
- __The Form Runner server:__ an Orbeon Forms instance deployed as a web application into a servlet container

The proxy portlet communicates with the Form Runner server using HTTP.

The Form Runner server can be entirely hidden behind a firewall as it doesn't need direct access from the user's web browser.

## Installation

Install and deploy Orbeon Forms [as usual][2]. You can deploy it:

- within the same container as Liferay
- in a separate servlet container

Note the URL at which Form runner is deployed. The default is assumed to be:

    http://localhost:8080/orbeon/

_NOTE: An instance of Form Runner configured as server for the proxy portlet cannot, as of 2011-01-07, be used as a regular instance of Form Runner due to the URL rewriting configuration. See the Limitations section below for more details._

### Configure Form Runner

For Orbeon Forms 4.0 and newer, no particular configuration is needed.

_NOTE: For builds prior to 2012-05-14, you need the following configuration in your [properties-local.xml][3]:_

```xml
<property
    as="xs:boolean"
    name="oxf.url-rewriting.wsrp.encode-resources"
    value="true"/>
```

_NOTE: Prior to 2011-10-18 builds, the following property is also needed:_

```xml
<property
    as="xs:string"
    name="oxf.url-rewriting.strategy.servlet"
    value="wsrp"/>
```

### Deploy the proxy portlet

1. Deploy `proxy-portlet.war` (formerly `orbeon-PE-proxy-portlet.war`) into Liferay
2. Add an instance of The Orbeon Forms → Form Runner portlet to a page:

![][4]

3\. The portlet will load with its default configuration. If Orbeon Forms is deployed at the default address, a form shows:

![][5]

If Orbeon Forms is _not_ deployed at the default address, the proxy portlet will initially show an error. You can ignore this error and proceed to the proxy portlet configuration below.

### Configure the proxy portlet

1. Open the portlet preferences page:

![][6]

2. Configure the preferences

![][7]

The preferences are as follows:

- __Form Runner Page__
    - Initial Form Runner action (page) to show
    - Possible values
        - _New Page_: show the "new" page for the given app/form
        - _Summary Page_: show the "summary" page for the given app/form
        - _Home Page_: Form Runner Home page showing the form list [SINCE Orbeon Forms 4.4]
- __Form Runner URL__
    - URL, including servlet context, where the Form Runner instance is deployed
    - Example: `http://localhost:8080/orbeon/`
- __Form Runner app name__
    - Initial Form Runner application name to show
    - Example: `orbeon`
- __Form Runner form name__
    - Initial Form Runner form name to show
    - Example: `controls`
- __Readonly access__
    - Whether the user is able to edit forms
    - _NOTE: To ensure read-only access, it is also important to configure a `oxf.fr.detail.buttons.view.*.*` property without the `workflow-edit` button._
- __Send Liferay language__ [SINCE Orbeon Forms 4.4]
    - Whether Form Runner should use the Liferay user's language
    - This also hides the Form Runner language selector
- __Send Liferay user__ [SINCE Orbeon Forms 4.4]
    - Whether the Liferay user information is sent to Form Runner
    - This sends the following headers to Form Runner
        - `Orbeon-Liferay-User-Id`
        - `Orbeon-Liferay-User-Screen-Name`
        - `Orbeon-Liferay-User-Full-Name`
        - `Orbeon-Liferay-User-Email`
        - `Orbeon-Liferay-User-Group-Id`
        - `Orbeon-Liferay-User-Group-Name`
        - `Orbeon-Liferay-User-Roles`

When read-only access is enabled, if the Form Runner summary page is enabled and accessed, selecting a form takes the user to the Review page instead of the Edit page for a given form.

Press the "Save" or "Cancel" button to save/cancel and return to the portlet.

The default values of the preferences are provided via initialization parameters in the `portlet.xml` file. The latest version of this file is [available here][8].

### Configuring header and URL parameter forwarding

[SINCE Orbeon Forms 4.1]

Specific client URL parameters and client request headers can be forwarded to Form Runner with the following portlet init parameters:

```xml
<init-param>
    <name>forward-parameters</name>
    <value>param1 param2</value>
</init-param>
<init-param>
    <name>forward-headers</name>
    <value>My-Header-1 My-Header-2</value>
</init-param>
```

The value of the parameters is  a space-separated list of parameter names or header names.

This makes these headers and URL parameters available to Form Runner, for example with the `xxf:get-request-header()` and `xxf:get-request-parameter()` functions.

[SINCE Orbeon Forms 4.2]

Headers forwarded now follow the capitalization specified in the `forward-headers` property. For example, if the incoming header has name `mY-hEaDeR-1,` and the property specifies `My-Header-1`, the header will be forwarded under the name `My-Header-1`.

### Configuring Form Runner to use Liferay user information

[SINCE Orbeon Forms 4.4]

When "Send Liferay user" is enabled, you can configure Form Runner to use the HTTP headers sent by the proxy portlet to handle forms access control. For this, you must use the "Header-driven method". Set the following properties:

```xml
<property
    as="xs:string"
    name="oxf.fr.authentication.method"
    value="header"/>
<property
    as="xs:string"
    name="oxf.fr.authentication.header.username"
    value="Orbeon-Liferay-User-Screen-Name"/>
<property
    as="xs:string"
    name="oxf.fr.authentication.header.group"
    value="Orbeon-Liferay-User-Group-Name"/>
<property
    as="xs:string"
    name="oxf.fr.authentication.header.roles"
    value="Orbeon-Liferay-User-Roles"/>
```

For the `oxf.fr.authentication.header.username` header, you can choose any of the Liferay headers associated with the user, but typically this will be:

- `Orbeon-Liferay-User-Id`
- `Orbeon-Liferay-User-Screen-Name`
- or possibly `Orbeon-Liferay-User-Email`

_NOTE: For builds prior to Orbeon 4.9, you need the following configuration in your [properties-local.xml][3]:_

```xml
<property
    as="xs:string"
    name="oxf.http.forward-headers"
    value="Orbeon-Liferay-User-Screen-Name Orbeon-Liferay-User-Group-Name Orbeon-Liferay-User-Roles"/>
<property
    as="xs:string"
    name="oxf.xforms.forward-submission-headers"
    value="Orbeon-Liferay-User-Screen-Name Orbeon-Liferay-User-Group-Name Orbeon-Liferay-User-Roles"/>
```

### Enabling form selection via URL parameters

[SINCE Orbeon Forms 4.7]

You can enable form selection via URL parameters by setting the `enable-url-parameters` portlet parameter in `portlet.xml` to `true`:

```xml
<init-param>
    <name>enable-url-parameters</name>
    <value>true</value>
</init-param>
````

When this is enabled, the following portal URL parameters are propagated to Orbeon Forms to allow form selection:

- `orbeon-app`: the Form Runner app name
- `orbeon-form`: the Form Runner form name
- `orbeon-document`: the Form Runner document (for `edit` and `view` pages)
- `orbeon-page`: the Form Runner page (`new`, `edit`, or `view`)

### HTTP client configuration

[SINCE Orbeon Forms 4.7]

This is the same as the [[server-side embedding configuration|Form-Runner-~-APIs-~-Server-side-Embedding]].

## Performance tuning

See the Performance tuning section in [Deploying Orbeon Forms as a Portlet into Liferay](http://wiki.orbeon.com/forms/doc/developer-guide/admin/deployment-portlet).

## Securing Form Runner with an IP filter

### Rationale

The proxy portlet can be secured with Liferay. On the other hand, the Form Runner server runs as a servlet and whether it runs within the same container as Liferay or on a different machine, direct accesses from end clients must be prevented.

One first step to achieve this is to place the Form Runner server behind a firewall, where it can be accessed from the portal but not from end clients.

Additional security steps can be desirable depending on your environment. One such step is to use an IP filter in order to:

- Allow accesses from the proxy portlet and from Form Runner itself.
- Disallow accesses from any other sources.

The following describes such a configuration.

### Example configuration

There are many IP filter options out there. One option is to use the very flexible [UrlRewriteFilter][9]. You can configure it this way:

#### Put urlrewrite-3.2.0.jar in the Orbeon Forms WEB-INF/lib folder

#### Configure the filter in Orbeon Forms WEB-INF/web.xml

```xml
<filter>
    <filter-name>UrlRewriteFilter</filter-name>
    <filter-class>org.tuckey.web.filters.urlrewrite.UrlRewriteFilter</filter-class>
</filter>
<filter-mapping>
    <filter-name>UrlRewriteFilter</filter-name>
    <url-pattern>/*</url-pattern>
    <dispatcher>REQUEST</dispatcher>
    <dispatcher>FORWARD</dispatcher>
</filter-mapping>
```

This is a generic configuration which enables the filter for any incoming path.

#### Put the `urlrewrite.xml` configuration in the Orbeon WEB-INF folder

Here is an example configuration:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<urlrewrite>
    <rule>
        <condition type="remote-addr" operator="notequal">0:0:0:0:0:0:0:1%0</condition>
        <condition type="remote-addr" operator="notequal">127.0.0.1</condition>
        <set type="status">403</set>
        <to type="temporary-redirect" last="true">/unauthorized</to>
    </rule>
</urlrewrite>
```

This configuration encodes the following rule: "for any incoming path, if the remote IP is different from `0:0:0:0:0:0:0:1%0` (IPv6) and different from `127.0.0.1` (IPv4), then set the status to 403 and redirect to the path /unauthorized".

You should modify the IP address(es) to fit your network configuration, as the originating address might not be `127.0.0.1`, as well as modify the redirection path.

Enabling UrlRewriteFilter's logging is helpful to see what's happening during development. To do this, modify the `` config to:

```xml
<filter>
    <filter-name>UrlRewriteFilter</filter-name>
    <filter-class>org.tuckey.web.filters.urlrewrite.UrlRewriteFilter</filter-class>
    <init-param>
        <param-name>confReloadCheckInterval</param-name>
        <param-value>0</param-value>
    </init-param>
    <init-param>
        <param-name>logLevel</param-name>
        <param-value>DEBUG</param-value>
    </init-param>
</filter>
```

_NOTE: You could also setup filtering on the type "remote-host" and check on the value "localhost" instead of filtering on IP addresses, however often reverse DNS lookups are not enabled in servlet containers for performance reasons, which means you need to filter by IP address instead._

#### Test the setup

Make sure accesses from the proxy portlet work as before, and test that accesses from machines other than the portal and/or directly from the client browser get rejected.

## Scenarios

### Scenario: create and save form data

In this scenario, the user of the portlet is only allowed to capture and save form data.

Portlet preferences:

- __Form Runner action:__ new
- __Read-Only access:__ false

Configuration properties in `properties-local.xml` (here for the orbeon/contact form):

```xml
<property
    as="xs:string"
    name="oxf.fr.detail.buttons.orbeon.contact"
    value="clear submit"/>
<property
    as="xs:string"
    name="oxf.fr.detail.submit.buttons.orbeon.contact"
    value="clear"/>
```

### Scenario: list, edit, create and save form data

In this scenario, the user of the portlet can, in addition to capture and save, also list and edit submitted form data.

Portlet preferences:

- __Form Runner action:__ summary
- __Read-Only access:__ false

Configuration properties in `properties-local.xml` (here for the orbeon/contact form):

```xml
<property
    as="xs:string"
    name="oxf.fr.summary.buttons.orbeon.contact"
    value="new edit delete"/>
<property
    as="xs:string"
    name="oxf.fr.detail.buttons.orbeon.contact"
    value="close clear submit"/>
<property
    as="xs:string"
    name="oxf.fr.detail.submit.buttons.orbeon.contact"
    value="clear"/>
```

_NOTE: Remove the `delete` token if the Delete button is not needed._

### Scenario: list and review form data

In this scenario, the user of the portlet is only allowed to capture and save form data.

Portlet preferences:

- __Form Runner action:__ summary
- __Read-Only access:__ true

Configuration properties in `properties-local.xml` (here for the orbeon/contact form):

```xml
<property
    as="xs:string"
    name="oxf.fr.summary.buttons.orbeon.contact"
    value="print pdf"/>
<property
    as="xs:string"
    name="oxf.fr.detail.buttons.view.orbeon.contact"
    value="close"/>
```

## Limitations

### Form Runner configuration properties are global

The Form Runner configuration properties are global, i.e. a given Form Runner server cannot have configuration properties per portlet (although it can have them per app/form name). This means for example that for a given app/form/action, it is not possible to have a different set of buttons.

Concretely, this means that you cannot have the  following portlet instances at the same time:

- `orbeon/contact` form in "list, edit, create and save form data" scenario
- `orbeon/contact` form in "list and review form data" scenario

This is because both scenarios need a different configuration for the summary page buttons.

### Orbeon Forms URL rewriting configuration is global

_NOTE: This is no longer a limitation with Orbeon Forms 4.0 and nightly builds since 2011-10-18._

~~The Form Runner server's URL rewriting configuration is global. This configuration makes Orbeon Forms in effect inaccessible directly from a web browser.~~

~~This means that:~~

- ~~Form Builder must be deployed as its own WAR. So you deploy:~~
    - ~~one Orbeon Forms instance specifically as Form Runner server~~
    - ~~one Orbeon Forms instance as Form Builder server (or as a general-purpose Orbeon Forms installation)~~
- ~~Your Form Runner database (eXist, Oracle, etc., or your own persistence layer implementation) must be shared between the two installations.~~


[1]: http://wiki.orbeon.com/forms/doc/developer-guide/admin/deployment-portlet
[2]: http://wiki.orbeon.com/forms/doc/developer-guide/admin/installing
[3]: http://wiki.orbeon.com/forms/doc/developer-guide/configuration-properties
[4]: ./images/fr-liferay-add-form-runner.png
[5]: ./images/fr-liferay-proxy-portlet.png
[6]: ./images/fr-liferay-portlet-preferences.png
[7]: ./images/fr-liferay-portlet-config.png
[8]: https://github.com/orbeon/orbeon-forms/blob/master/descriptors/proxy-portlet/WEB-INF/portlet.xml
[9]: http://urlrewritefilter.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/src/doc/manual/3.2/index.html
