# S3 storage

## Availability

[SINCE Orbeon Forms 2024.1.1, 2025.1]

## Introduction

When sending an email using [the `email` action](/form-runner/advanced/buttons-and-processes/actions-form-runner-email.md), you can store attachments in an S3 bucket. This is done by setting the `s3-store` parameter to `true` and providing the `s3-config` and `s3-path` parameters to the action.

[Amazon Simple Storage Service (S3)](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/) is a cloud storage service provided by [Amazon Web Services (AWS)](https://aws.amazon.com/), but any S3-compatible service can be used, such as [MinIO](https://min.io/), [Backblaze B2](https://www.backblaze.com/), [Wasabi](https://wasabi.com/), and many others.

## Email action parameters

The following `email` action parameters are specific to S3 storage:

- `s3-store`: If `true`, email attachments are stored in an S3 bucket in addition to being sent via email. If `false` or absent, attachments are only sent via email.
- `s3-config`: Specifies the name of the S3 configuration to use. The S3 configuration properties are described below.
- `s3-path`: Defines the XPath expression used to determine the storage path for attachments. The path is relative to the root of the S3 bucket. It is evaluated against the XML data of the form. If the XPath expression evaluates to an empty string, attachments are stored at the root of the S3 bucket. This expression has the same constraints as [the PDF, TIFF and XML attachments filenames](https://doc.orbeon.com/configuration/properties/form-runner/form-runner-detail-page/form-runner-email#attachment-properties).

### Fallback behavior

- If `s3-config` or `s3-path` are not provided as parameters, the properties `oxf.fr.email.s3-config.*.*` or `oxf.fr.email.s3-path.*.*` are used instead.
- If a property is not found for the S3 configuration name, `default` is used as the S3 configuration name.
- A default value for the `oxf.fr.email.s3-path.*.*` property is provided, which uses the app name, form name, etc. to generate a path. It is however recommended to provide a custom path that fits your needs.

## Bucket configuration

An S3 configuration consists of a set of properties that follow the naming convention:

```
oxf.fr.s3.[configuration-name].[s3-property]
```

- `[configuration-name]`: The name of the S3 configuration.
- `[s3-property]`: One of the following properties:
    - `endpoint`: The S3 endpoint (default: `s3.amazonaws.com`)
    - `region`: The AWS region (e.g. `eu-south-1` or `us-east-1`)
    - `bucket`: The name of the S3 bucket.
    - `accesskey`: The access key for authentication.
    - `secretaccesskey`: The secret access key for authentication.

No default S3 configuration is provided. You must define at least one S3 configuration to use the `s3-store` parameter.

## Example

Your S3 configuration properties could define an S3 configuration named `form-submissions-bucket` that looks as follows:

```xml
<property as="xs:string"  name="oxf.fr.s3.form-submissions-bucket.endpoint"        value="s3.amazonaws.com"/>
<property as="xs:string"  name="oxf.fr.s3.form-submissions-bucket.region"          value="us-east-1"/>
<property as="xs:string"  name="oxf.fr.s3.form-submissions-bucket.bucket"          value="form-submissions"/>
<property as="xs:string"  name="oxf.fr.s3.form-submissions-bucket.accesskey"       value="YYDLE3Z65JK7SZLB5RXB"/>
<property as="xs:string"  name="oxf.fr.s3.form-submissions-bucket.secretaccesskey" value="1csA5grUiF/TcAD7lOkWd0KBrYLDhQtK5sWl163U"/>
```

You then reference the `form-submissions-bucket` configuration in an `email` action, which might look as the example below. This example uses the default value for `s3-path`; if that default works for you, you can skip this parameter. This example includes only S3-specific parameters, but you may want to add other parameters documented on the [Form Runner email action](/form-runner/advanced/buttons-and-processes/actions-form-runner-email.md) page.

```
email(
    s3-store  = "true",
    s3-config = "form-submissions-bucket",
    s3-path   =
      "concat(
          fr:app-name(),      '/',
          fr:form-name(),     '/',
          fr:form-version(),  '/',
          current-dateTime(), '-',
          fr:document-id()
      )"
)
```

With the example path above, the S3 objects would be stored with keys such as:

- `my-app/my-form/1/2025-03-12T03:43:43.334-07:00-175279c65b1cc95d1b027f3c92c3beebc85c05aa/My form.xml`
- `my-app/my-form/1/2025-03-12T03:43:43.334-07:00-175279c65b1cc95d1b027f3c92c3beebc85c05aa/My form.pdf`
- `my-app/my-form/1/2025-03-12T03:43:43.334-07:00-175279c65b1cc95d1b027f3c92c3beebc85c05aa/user-attachment.jpg`
- `my-app/my-form/1/2025-03-12T03:43:43.334-07:00-175279c65b1cc95d1b027f3c92c3beebc85c05aa/user-attachment.doc`

## Access and secret access keys

This is a general description of how to get access and secret access keys for AWS. The process will be different for other S3-compatible services.

You will typically define a policy in [AWS Identity and Access Management (IAM)](https://aws.amazon.com/iam/) that allows access to the S3 bucket. You then create a user in IAM, attach the policy to the user, and generate a new pair of access and secret access keys under "Security credentials" > "Access keys". You can then use these keys in the S3 configuration properties. Alternatively, you can also attach the policy to a user group or a role, and then assign the user to the group or the role.

A simple policy that restricts access to a single bucket might look like the following:

```json
{
    "Version": "2012-10-17",
    "Statement": [
        {
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Action": "s3:*",
            "Resource": [
                "arn:aws:s3:::form-submissions",
                "arn:aws:s3:::form-submissions/*"
            ]
        }
    ]
}
```

Note that bucket names need to be unique across all of AWS.

## See also

- [Form Runner email action](/form-runner/advanced/buttons-and-processes/actions-form-runner-email.md)
